[minor] Add groups (#108)
chipsalliance/firrtl-spec: spec.md

group may not drive components declared outside the group.  In the above
example, `notA` is accessible in the group definition of `Quz` because `notA` is
declared in a parent group.

Group instances may declare output, passive ports of `Probe`{.firrtl} type.
These ports are accessible in parent modules which instantiate the child.  In
the example below, module `Baz` defines a group `Bar` with an output port `_a`.
This port is accessible inside module `Foo` within its defined group `Bar`.
_Put differently, module `Baz` has an additional port `_a` that is only
accessible inside a defined group `Bar`_.

``` firrtl
circuit Foo:
  declgroup Bar:

  module Baz:
    wire a: UInt<1>

    group bar of Bar:
      output _a: Probe<UInt<1>>
      node notA = not(a)
      define _a = probe(notA)

  module Foo:

    inst baz of Baz

    group bar of Bar:
      node _b = baz._a
```

External modules may also have output, passive ports of probe type declared for
their optional groups.  The following example shows declared group `Bar` with an
output port `a`.

``` firrtl
extmodule Foo:
  declgroup Bar:
    output a: Probe<UInt<1>>
```

> 

Author: It is slightly inconsistent that `declgroup` can have ports when in an external module, but not have ports when in a circuit. Given this, it would be better to use a different keyword here, e.g., `extgroup`, that is specific to declaring a group with ports inside an external module.

Reviewer: `hasgroup` ? `usesgroup`?

Reviewer 2: I like `extgroup`. I would also be okay with `group` (makes more sense to me than `declgroup` for this use), but having a different keyword is probably the clearest thing to do.

Reviewer 2: Offline @seldridge mention that there are potential namespace issues with groups defined in extmodules so `group` definitely doesn't make sense, I see how `declgroup` made some sense but yeah I think `extgroup` is probably the best option.

instance statement for details on how to instantiate a module
([@sec:instances]).

## Optional Groups

Optional groups are named collections of statements inside a module.  Optional
groups contain optional functionality for a module that can be included or

> excluded without affecting the functionality of a circuit.  Optional groups are

Reviewer 3: I understand what you are going for, but maybe better wording?  I'm not sure quite what.  "Optional groups contain functionality which will not be present in all executions of a circuit."

> used to keep verification, debugging, or other collateral, not relevant to the

Reviewer 3: "are intended to be used to keep"?

operation of the circuit, in a separate area.  Each group can then be optionally
included in the resulting design.

The `declgroup`{.firrtl} keyword declares an optional group with a specific

> identifier.  An optional group may be declared in either a circuit, and external

Reviewer 3: /and/an/

> module, or in another optional group declaration.  An optional group's

Reviewer 3: how do names work with groups declared in an external module?  do they alias and must have the same implementation as local?  Are they usable from the local circuit?  

I'm wondering if instead of adding bodies to external modules, we declare them using a declgroup root:
`extmodule Foo using declgroup A` with declgroup A being just a normal declaration.  Then there wouldn't be confusion about multiple conflicting As  (linking is then not just textural substitution, but with named types it already might not be).

identifier must be unique within the current namespace.  I.e., the identifier of
a top-level group declared in a circuit must not conflict with the identifier of
a module, external module, or implementation defined module.

Each optional group declaration must include a string that sets the lowering
convention for that group.  The FIRRTL ABI specification defines supported
lowering convention.  One such strategy is `"bind"`{.firrtl} which lowers to
modules and instances which are instantiated using the SystemVerilog
`bind`{.verilog} feature.

The `group`{.firrtl} keyword defines an optional group.  An optional group may
only be defined inside a module.  An optional group must reference a group
declared in the current circuit.  Statements in an optional groups may only read
from ports or declarations of the current module or the current

> group---statements in a group may not drive components declared outside the

Reviewer 3: Maybe explicitly mention names are resolved via lexical scoping, as per when and match.

Author: I'll add a forward reference to it. It's annoying that this is a forward reference, though... (Maybe we can restructure the spec to not require such cyclic references, e.g., define scoping very early on.)

> group.  Declarations of identifiers in a group may not collide with identifiers

Reviewer 3: The no-drive-outside scope is a big change which should be highlighted.  Maybe this is enough.

Author: I'll make this very explicit. Good thinking.

declared outside the group.

The circuit below contains one optional group declaration, `Bar`.  Module `Foo`
contains a group definition that creates a node computed from a port defined in
the scope of `Foo`.

``` firrtl
circuit Foo:
  declgroup "bind", Bar:  ; Declaration of group Bar

  module Foo:
    input a: UInt<1>

    group Bar:            ; Definition of group Bar inside module Foo
      node notA = not(a)

  extmodule Baz:
    input a: UInt<1>
    output b: UInt<1>

>     declgroup "bind" Bar: ; Declaration of group Bar for extmodule Baz

Reviewer 3: Looking at this, I do think not having the declgroups in extmodules might be cleaner:
```
  extmodule Baz using declgroup Bar:
    input a: UInt<1>
    output b: UInt<1>
```
As then you don't have to specify how two declgroups with different implementation strings interact.

Reviewer 3: Or alternately, maybe we just don't need to know this information?

    declgroup "bind", Qux:
      declgroup "bind", Quz:
```

Optional group definitions must match the nesting of declared groups.  Optional
groups are defined under existing groups with the `group`{.firrtl} keyword
indented under an existing `group`{.firrtl} keyword.  For the four declared
groups in the circuit above, the following is a legal nesting of group
definitions:

``` firrtl
module Foo:
  input a: UInt<1>

  group Bar:
    node notA = not(a)
    group Baz:
    group Qux:
      group Quz:
        node notNotA = not(notA)
```

Statements in a nested optional group may only read from ports or declarations
of the current module, the current group, or a parent group---statements in a
group may not drive components declared outside the group.  In the above
example, `notA` is accessible in the group definition of `Quz` because `notA` is
declared in a parent group.

Group instances may declare output, passive ports of `Probe`{.firrtl} type.
These ports are accessible in parent modules which instantiate the child.  In
the example below, module `Baz` defines a group `Bar` with an output port `_a`.
This port is accessible inside module `Foo` within its defined group `Bar`.

> _Put differently, module `Baz` has an additional port `_a` that is only

Reviewer 3: Stray "_".

Author: This is making the sentence italicized. It is terminated at the end of the sentence. 😉

accessible inside a defined group `Bar`_.

``` firrtl
circuit Foo:
  declgroup "bind", Bar:

  module Baz:
    wire a: UInt<1>

    group Bar:

>       output _a: Probe<UInt<1>>

Reviewer 3: I was going to ask how _a was accessed.  It might be better to not have group outputs implicitly part of module outputs.
```
  module Baz:
    output _a: Probe<UInt<1>>
    wire a: UInt<1>
   
    group Bar:
      output _a: Probe<UInt<1>>
      node notA = not(a)
      define _a = probe(notA)

  define _a <= Bar._a
  ```

Author: I want to indicate that the optional output is associated with the group which is why I didn't want to put them on the module. However, I could use something more direct (which is how I would implement this in a compiler)---each probe port has an optional group associated with it:

```
module Baz:
  output _a: Probe<UInt<1>, Bar>
  wire a: UInt<1>

  group Bar:
    node notA = not(a)
    define _a = probe(notA)
```

WDYT?

Author: Switched to this in the latest version.

      node notA = not(a)
      define _a = probe(notA)

  module Foo:

    inst baz of Baz

    group Bar:
      node _b = baz._a
```

External modules may also have output, passive ports of probe type declared for
their optional groups.  The following example shows declared group `Bar` with an
output port `a`.

``` firrtl

> extmodule Foo:

Reviewer 3: Which you do here.

Author: I'm going to punt on how external modules play into this for now. This will be handled in a later PR.

  declgroup "bind", Bar:
    output a: Probe<UInt<1>>
```

To summarize, optional groups have the following rules:

> 1. The identifiers of optional group declarations must be unique within the

Reviewer 3: I don't know that the summary is a good idea.  There isn't that much text above.

Author: I'll strike it.

  parameter y = 42
```

An example of an externally defined module with references and groups is:

```firrtl

> extmodule MyExternalModuleWithRefs :

Reviewer: AndGroups?

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/chipsalliance/firrtl-spec/pull/108/commits/0a54caf039ac72960226a34c368eafeb2cc90911

  parameter y = 42
```

An example of an externally defined module with references and groups is:

```firrtl
extmodule MyExternalModuleWithRefsAndGroups :
  input foo : UInt<2>
  output mysignal : Probe<UInt<1>>
  output myreg : RWProbe<UInt<8>>
  ref mysignal is "a.b"
  ref myreg is "x.y"
  defgroup MyGroup

>   defgroup MyOtherGroup

Reviewer: can you show what this looks like for a nested group?

Author: Will add this in a later commit.

itself, either directly, or indirectly through instances of other modules it
instantiates.

## Groups

Groups are named collections of statements inside a module.  Groups contain

> optional functionality for a module that can be included or excluded without

Reviewer: Given this meaning, should the name of this concept be something like "optional group"?

Author: Possibly. I'll switch to that for now. I also considered "verification groups", but that may be too narrow for their use.

Author: Switched to "optional groups".

affecting the intended functionality of a circuit.  Groups are primarily used to
keep verification, debugging, or FIRRTL statements, not relevant to the
operation of the circuit, in a separate area.  Groups have special emission
rules defined in the FIRRTL ABI.

The `defgroup`{.firrtl} statement declares a group with a specific name.  A
`defgroup`{.firrtl} may declare a group for a `circuit`{.firrtl} or for an
`extmodule`{.firrtl}.  Group names participate specially in the module
namespace--no module may include a suffix of `_<group-name>` for any declared
group name.

The `group`{.firrtl} statement creates a group instance within a module.  A
`group`{.firrtl} must refer to a group declared by a `defgroup`{.firrtl} of the

> current `circtui`{.firrtl}.

Reviewer: Circuit

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/chipsalliance/firrtl-spec/pull/108/commits/0a54caf039ac72960226a34c368eafeb2cc90911

itself, either directly, or indirectly through instances of other modules it
instantiates.

> ## Optional Groups

Reviewer: should this Optional Group chapter go before ExtModule since we refer to it in the ExtModule chapter?

Author: I'll rework this to do that. This section was written before the `declgroup` declaration was added which resulted in the ordering.

suffix of `_<group-name>` for any declared group name.

The `group`{.firrtl} statement creates an optional group instance within a
module.  A `group`{.firrtl} must refer to an optional group name declared by a
`defgroup`{.firrtl} of the current `circuit`{.firrtl}.  A `group`{.firrtl}
includes statements which refer to sources outside the group.

The `circuit`{.firrtl} below contains one, `Bar`.  Module `Foo` contains a group
instance that creates a node computed from a port defined outside its scope.

``` firrtl
circuit Foo:
  defgroup Bar:          ; declare the group Bar

  module Foo:
    input a: UInt<1>

    group bar of Bar:    ; create the group instance bar
      node notA = not(a)

  extmodule Baz:
    input a: UInt<1>
    output b: UInt<1>
    defgroup Bar:        ; a group may be declared on an external module
```

Groups may be nested.  Nested groups are declared with the `defgroup`{.firrtl}
statement indented under an existing `defgroup`{.firrtl}.  The circuit below
contains four groups.  `Bar` is the top-level group.  `Baz` and `Qux` are nested
under `Bar`.  `Quz` is nested under `Qux`.

``` firrtl
circuit Foo:

>   defgroup Bar:

Author: They are now opening a possibly empty scope. It's the same syntax as empty module (which is much rarer):

```
circuit Foo:
  module Bar:
  module Foo:
```

Maybe there's a better approach, e.g., `:` is optional if there is no scope or this could use 😨 `{}`.

I'd like to keep this consistent with how other scopes work (module, when, etc.) and then do a batch syntax change for all scopes.

>   defgroup Bar:

Reviewer: for some reason i thought you had to write `pass` for an empty module

groups in the circuit above, the following is a legal group nesting:

``` firrtl
module Foo:
  input a: UInt<1>

  group bar of Bar:
    node notA = not(a)
    group baz of Baz:
    group qux of Qux:
      group quz of Quz:
        node notNotA = not(notA)
```

Anything in a parent group, or in the outer module, is accessible.  In the above
example, `notA` is accessible in group instance `quz` because group instance
`bar` is a parent group.

Group instances may declare output, passive ports of `Probe`{.firrtl} type.
These ports are accessible in parent modules which instantiate the child.  In
the example below, module `Baz` has a group instance `bar` with an output port
`_a`.  This port is accessible inside module `Foo` within its group instance
`bar`.  _Put differently, module `Baz` has an additional port `_a`, but only
when inside a group instance of group `Bar`_.

``` firrtl
circuit Foo:
  defgroup Bar:

  module Baz:
    wire a: UInt<1>

    group bar of Bar:
      output _a: Probe<UInt<1>>
      node notA = not(a)
      define _a = probe(notA)

  module Foo:

    inst baz of Baz

    group bar of Bar:
      node _b = baz._a
```

> External modules may also have output, passive ports of probe type.  The

Author: Yes. Will clarify. 👍

> External modules may also have output, passive ports of probe type.  The
> following example shows this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
External modules may also have output, passive ports of probe type that are provided by an optional group.  The
following example shows this:
```

``` firrtl
extmodule Foo:
  defgroup Bar:
    output a: Probe<UInt<1>>
```

To summarize, optional groups have the following rules:

> 1. Modules or external modules which contain groups may not be instantiated in

Author: I'll update this. 👍

   a group.
1. Connections in an optional group instance must not connect to sinks declared
   outside the group or in parent groups.
1. All other statements and expressions are allowed inside a group instance.

> 1. Group instances may have output ports of passive, probe type.

Author: This will get updated in a later commit.

   outside the group or in parent groups.
1. All other statements and expressions are allowed inside a group instance.
1. Group instances may have output ports of passive, probe type.
1. A first module that instantiates a second module may access ports of the
   second module declared in the second module's group instance within a group

>    instance in the first module if the group instances are the same or if the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   instance in the first module if the group instances are of the same group or if the
```

>    second module's group instance is a parent of the first module's group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   first module's group instance is within the nested group hierarchy of the second module's group.
```

Reviewer: or something -- now that we have two hierarchy systems going i found this confusing the way it was written

Author: This condition is difficult to write. Cleaning this up in `fixup!` commit.

  | "connect" , reference , "," , expr , [ info ]
  | "invalidate" , reference , [ info ]

(* Group definitions *)

> defgroup = "defgroup" , id ;

Reviewer: What is this top level one for? Can you give an example?

Author: It's to declare the groups that can be used later. This makes it way easier to know what groups exist. Otherwise, you need to scan the entire IR and look for any group instances. This is also then used for check if a group instance is legal. If circuit `Foo` is conforming to an interface, it can only have certain legal groups. By making the groups declared up front this is easier.

Here's a bigger example. It would be illegal for any of the modules to have a "wildcat" group like `group qux of Qux` because that was not declared.

```
circuit Foo:
  defgroup Bar           ; declare the group Bar

  module Baz:
    input a: UInt<1>

    group bar of Bar:    ; create the group instance bar
      node notA = not(a)

  module Foo:
    input a: UInt<1>

    group bar of Bar:    ; create the group instance bar
      node notA = not(a)

    inst baz of Baz
    baz.a <= a
```

This will then produce the following Verilog:

```verilog
// Inside file "Foo.sv":
module Foo(
  input a
  Baz baz(.a(a));
);
endmodule

// Inside file "Baz.sv":
module Baz(
  input a
);
endmodule

// Inside file "Foo_Bar.sv":
module Foo_Bar(
  input a
);
  wire notA = ~a;
endmodule

// Inside file "Baz_Bar.sv":
module Baz_Bar(
  input a
);
  wire notA = ~a;
endmodule

// Inside file "bindings_Foo_Bar.sv" :
bind Foo Foo_Bar bar(.a(a));
bind Baz Baz_Bar bar(.a(a));
```

  | "connect" , reference , "," , expr , [ info ]
  | "invalidate" , reference , [ info ] ;

(* Group definitions *)

> defgroup = "defgroup" , id ;

Author: Will fix this in a later commit.

              { "parameter" , "=" , ( int | string_dq ) , newline } ,
            dedent ;

(* Group definitions *)
defgroup = "defgroup" , id , ":" , [ info ] , newline , indent ,

>              { port , newline } ,

Reviewer: i dont fully understand this syntax, but shouldn't it have a { defgroup }, here?

Author: Yep.
